Title: Removing All Files And Directories, Including Hidden Ones
Date: 2/11/19
Excerpt: How to remove all files and directories in a folder in Linux
Tags: Linux


When working with git On Linux, to remove all files and directories in a folder, including hidden ones, use

```
rm -r * .*
```

The `rm` is for remove.  The `-r` flag is for recursive so it will delete folders. The first `*` means, "delete all files and directories in the current folder".  The `.*` means delete any files/folders that begin with a period.  Since hidden folders and files start with a period, this removes hidden files/folders. Hidden directories will be ignored by rm by default if you don't specify `.*`.

I work with git a lot and there's always the hidden .git folder and usually I also like to add a .gitignore file. This is great until I need to delete the parent folder. I was a bit confounded until I found the `.*` input to rm which takes care of it.  One thing to note is that rm will throw an non-fatal error message:

```
rm: refusing to remove '.' or '..' directory: skipping '.'
rm: refusing to remove '.' or '..' directory: skipping '..'
```

This is fine. The . and .. are the "names" of the current folder and its parent folder, respectively. A linux directory is really just a list of names (and inode numbers) of the files and directories inside it.  The . and .. cannot and should not be removed.  [Here](http://teaching.idallen.com/cst8207/13w/notes/450_file_system.html) is a good explanation of how inodes and Linux directories work, if you're interested.
